.NET Aspire 9.0 - GA Release content (#1867)
dotnet/docs-aspire: docs/serverless/functions.md

:::zone-end

## Supported scenarios

The .NET Aspire Azure Functions integration has several key supported scenarios. This section outlines the scenarios and provides details related to the implementation of each approach.

### Supported triggers

The following table lists the supported triggers for Azure Functions in the .NET Aspire integration:

| Trigger | Attribute | Details |
|--|--|--|
| Azure Event Hubs trigger | `EventHubTrigger` | [📦 Aspire.Hosting.Azure.EventHubs](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Aspire.Hosting.Azure.EventHubs) |
| Azure Service Bus trigger | `ServiceBusTrigger` | [📦 Aspire.Hosting.Azure.ServiceBus](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Aspire.Hosting.Azure.ServiceBus) |
| Azure Storage Blobs trigger | `BlobTrigger` | [📦 Aspire.Hosting.Azure.Storage](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Aspire.Hosting.Azure.Storage) |
| Azure Storage Queues trigger | `QueueTrigger` | [📦 Aspire.Hosting.Azure.Storage](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Aspire.Hosting.Azure.Storage) |
| HTTP trigger | `HttpTrigger` | Supported without any additional resource dependencies. |

> | Timer trigger | `TimerTrigger` | [📦 Aspire.Hosting.Azure.Storage](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Aspire.Hosting.Azure.Storage) |

Reviewer: We spin up the host storage that the `TimerTrigger` needs behind the scenes so the user doesn't need to install the package themselves for this.

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > Other Azure Functions trigger types aren't currently supported in the .NET Aspire Azure Functions integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Other Azure Functions triggers and bindings aren't currently supported in the .NET Aspire Azure Functions integration.
```

Input and output bindings also fall into the category of things we don't support.

### Deployment

Currently, deployment is supported only to containers on Azure Container Apps (ACA) using the SDK container publish function in `Microsoft.Azure.Functions.Worker.Sdk`. This deployment methodology doesn't currently support KEDA-based autoscaling.

#### Configure external HTTP endpoints

To make HTTP triggers publicly accessible, call the `WithExternalHttpEndpoints` API on the `AzureFunctionsProjectResource`. For more information, see [Add Azure Functions resource](#add-azure-functions-resource).

## Azure Function project constraints

The .NET Aspire Azure Functions integration has the following project constraints:

> - You must target .NET 8.0 or later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You must target .NET 8.0 or later.
- You must use a .NET 9 SDK.
```

From today's call.

### Add Azure Functions resource with host storage

If you want to modify the default host storage account that the Azure Functions host uses, call the `WithHostStorage` method on the Azure Functions project resource:

```csharp
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var storage = builder.AddAzureStorage("storage")
                     .RunAsEmulator();

var functions = builder.AddAzureFunctionsProject<Projects.ExampleFunctions>("functions")
                       .WithHostStorage(storage);

builder.AddProject<Projects.ExampleProject>()
       .WithReference(functions)
       .WaitFor(functions);

// After adding all resources, run the app...
```

The preceding code relies on the [📦 Aspire.Hosting.Azure.Storage](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Aspire.Hosting.Azure.Storage) NuGet package to add an Azure Storage resource that runs as an emulator. The `storage` resource is then passed to the `WithHostStorage` API, explicitly setting the host storage to the emulated resource.

> [!NOTE]

> > The `StorageAccountContributor` role is required for deployed instances, it's up to the user to manually configure this role with their resource when they're publishing. This role assignment is included automatically for the implicitly generated host storage.

Reviewer: This should clarify that you only need to manually configure if you are _not_ using the implicit host storage.
